:memo: New build and deploy page (#2009)
platformsh/platformsh-docs: docs/src/overview/build-deploy.md

---
title: "Build and deploy"
weight: 2
description: |

---
The build process looks through the configuration files in your repository and assembles the necessary containers on every Git push.
The deploy process makes those containers live, replacing the previous versions, with virtually no interruption in service.
Both processes are triggered by a push to a live branch or by activating an [environment](/administration/web/environments.md) for a branch.
![Build pipeline](/images/workflow/build-pipeline.svg "0.50")

## Glossary

> **Build hook**: It comprises one or more shell commands that you write to finish creating your production code base.

Reviewer: Two things:
1. I think the best way to do a list of definitions is through description lists (formerly known as definition lists):
   ```markdown
   Build hook
   : Here is the definition
   ```
2. I think glossaries are useful for general terms that won't be covered in the article. These hooks seem very specific to the build and deploy process, so I probably wouldn't include them here, but would define them below in context. The template references "Terms ... that are not specific to the concept being explained". I'd think of it as like prerequisite terms.

---
title: "Build and deploy"
weight: 2
description: |

> ---

Author: I would have the page intro either here or on line 4 but I wouldn't have both.

## The build

The build step is environment-independent to ensure development environments are perfect copies of production.
This means you can not connect to services (like the database) during the build.
The final built application is read-only.
If your application requires writing to the filesystem, you can specify the directories that require Read/Write access.

### Build steps

Git push

Pull container image
: It pulls container images that might be already in the project.

Validate configuration**
: The configuration is checked by validating the shared `.platform` directory (routes and services), as well scanning the repository for all `.platform.app.yaml files` present to validate them individually.

Install dependencies
: If you have specified additional dependencies required by your build hook such as SaaS, webpack, or Drupal Console, and have provided valid versions, the dependencies get downloaded during this step.

Run build flavor commands
: The build runs a series of standard commands based on the build flavor specified in the configuration file.
It's possible to override this behavior and skipping the step.

> Run build hook

Reviewer: Maybe this is an example that shows that we should go back to having the glossary define terms in this article. I don't know.

I was just pointing out before what we have in the template, but we can change it. It depends on whether we think the glossary is like a "before you begin" section or more a part of the page. See if you think the definition would fit here, in the middle of the article, or at the start. :shrug:

> Run build hook

Author: I would have the glossary as a dictionary of terms stated in the page rather than a before you begin.  🤷

: The build hook comprises one or more shell commands that you write to finish creating your production code base.
It could be compiling Sass files, running a bundler, rearranging files on disk or compiling an application in a compiled language.The committed build hook runs in the build container. During this time, commands have write access to the file system, but services (including other applications in your cluster) aren't yet available.

Freeze app container
: Once the previous steps are completed, the file system gets freezed and produce a read-only container image, which is the final build artifact. An artifact is a custom-built snapshot of your application that's reliable and repeatable.
The container configuration for both your application and its underlying services is exclusively based on your configuration files.
A container has a 1:1 relationship with a Git commit.

> This means that builds are repeatable and that if the system detects that there aren't changes for a container,

Reviewer: I think it's partly "there aren't changes for a container" that makes it hard. It was just described as connected to Git commits and then that isn't in the next idea. A stronger connection would help.

it reuses the existing container image skipping the build step and saving time.

> 

Reviewer: Some sort of transition between the stages would help.

## The deploy

> The deploy process makes those containers live, replacing the previous versions, with virtually no interruption in service.

Reviewer: It's unclear to me what "those" containers are here. This is a new section and multiple containers weren't just talked about.

### Deploy steps

Hold requests

> : The system holds incoming requests so there is no service interruption.

Reviewer: I feel like using the passive would be better than having "the system" doing things in some of these places"

Unmount current containers

> : The containers gets disconnected from their file system mounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: The containers are disconnected from their file system mounts.
```

Mount file systems

> : The containers that were disconnected in the previous step, connect the file system to the new containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: The containers that were disconnected in the previous step connect the file system to the new containers.
```

I don't think the containers do the connecting. Perhaps something like "The new containers are connected to their file systems", but I'm uncertain about the intent here.

> If it's a new branch and doesn't have an existing file system, it gets cloned from the parent branch.

Reviewer: Is the "it" the file system? Are the they same as the "these" in the next sentence? These references are slightly unclear to me.

> Note that these shouldn't be directories with code since it would be a security risk.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this sentence. It feels more like a how-to or tutorial kind of thing rather than explaining the concept.

Expose services

> : The system opens the networking connections between the various containers that were specified in the configuration files (using the `relationships` key).

Reviewer: I feel like the part after "that" isn't really necessary and could be simplified. More in fitting with explaining the concept here. I think readers here might not know what the `relationships` key is. I'm not sure it's quite so helpful to the concept itself.

That helps with security, as only the specified connections exist.

> The connection information for each service is available in an application as environment variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The connection information for each service is available in each application in environment variables.
```

Run start commands

> : It’s technically optional for all runtimes. The only requirement is that you must have `web.commands.start` or `web.locations` and `hooks.deploy`.

Reviewer: This doesn't seem to describe what's being done. It seems more fitting for a how-to article. Here, I would describe what the purpose of these commands are rather than how to do them.

Run deploy hook
: The deploy hook is any number of shell commands including clearing caches, running database migrations, and so on. At this point you can access all services again since the application is up and running.
However, the file system where your code lives is now read-only.

Serve request

> : In this las step, the system allows the incoming requests to your newly deployed application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: In this last step, the system allows incoming requests to your newly deployed application.
```

Reviewer: I'd also be happy with some sort of conclusion.

---
title: Build and deploy
weight: 2
description: See how applications get built and deployed with Platform.sh.
---

Each time you push a change to your app through Git or activate an [environment](../administration/web/environments.md),
your app goes through a process to be built and deployed.

> If your app is redeployed with no changes, the output of the previous build and deploy process is used.

Reviewer: Seems better to me :+1:

The build process looks through the configuration files in your repository and assembles the necessary containers.
The deploy process makes those containers live, replacing any previous versions, with minimal interruption in service.

![The steps in the build and deploy process](/images/workflow/build-pipeline.svg "0.50")

## Glossary

Hooks
: Hooks are points in the build and deploy process where you can inject a custom script.

## The build

The outcome of the build process is designed to be repeatable and reusable.
Each app in a project is built separately.

Container configuration depends exclusively on your configuration files.
So each container is tied to a specific Git commit.
If there are no new changes for a given container, the existing container can be reused.

> This saves you the time of the build step.

Reviewer: It basically skips the whole build step, so I think it's OK to be stronger. Maybe something like "saves you the time the build step would take."?

> This saves you the time of the build step.

Reviewer 2: Perfect. That is clearer and stronger indeed.

> This means the build is independent of the given environment and development environments are perfect copies of production.

Reviewer: I didn't know this was true. If so, we should definitely include this information.

> This independence does mean you can't connect to services (like databases) during the build.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can connect to services (like databases) during the build step.
```
I'm trying to simplify what someone can do, and dropped the reference to the build independence from above. I think this might work better with the line below also. Would you agree?

Reviewer: I like the simplification. I'd commit the change, but it says you can connect during the build step, which I don't think is true.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for addressing the simplification and making it truthful 😅  not sure how I managed to change its meaning so much!

## The deploy

The deploy process connects each container from the build process and any services.
The connections are defined in your app and services configuration.

So unlike the build process, you can now access other containers,
but the file system is read-only.

### Deploy steps

1. **Hold requests**:
   Incoming requests are held to prevent service interruption.
1. **Unmount current containers**:
   Any previous containers are disconnected from their file system mounts.
1. **Mount file systems**:
   The file system is connected to the new containers.
   New branches have file systems cloned from their parent.
1. **Expose services**:
   Networking connections are opened between any containers specified in your app and services configurations.
1. **Run start commands**:
   The commands necessary to start your app are run.
1. **Run deploy hook**:
   The `deploy` hook is any number of shell commands you can run to finish your deployment.
   This can include clearing caches, running database migrations, and setting configuration that requires relationship information.
1. **Serve requests**:
  Incoming requests to your newly deployed application are allowed.

> After the deploy process is over, any commands in your `post_deploy` hook are run.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to add a next reads on these topics here at the bottom or connect the build and deploy hook to the docs on those?

Reviewer: I added a couple of links here and a link in the hooks doc to here (in #2017)

Reviewer 2: Looks great now, thanks!
